What I shall have to say will reflect the spending of many years in Wall
Street, with their attendant varieties of experience. This has included the
recurrent advent of new conditions, or a new atmosphere, which challenge
the value of experience itself. It is true that one of the elements that
distinguish economics, finance, and security analysis from other practical
disciplines is the uncertain validity of past phenomena as a guide to the
present and future. Yet we have no right to reject the lessons of the past
until we have at least studied and understood them. My address today is an
effort toward such understanding in a limited field—in particular, an
endeavor to point out some contrasting relationships between the present
and the past in our underlying attitudes toward investment and speculation
in common stocks.
Let me start with a summary of my thesis. In the past the speculative
elements of a common stock resided almost exclusively in the company
itself; they were due to uncertainties, or fluctuating elements, or downright
weaknesses in the industry, or the corporation’s individual setup. These
elements of speculation still exist, of course; but it may be said that they
have been sensibly diminished by a number of long-term developments to
which I shall refer. But in revenge a new and major element of speculation
has been introduced into the common-stock arena from outside the
companies. It comes from the attitude and viewpoint of the stock-buying
public and their advisers—chiefly us security analysts. This attitude may be
described in a phrase: primary emphasis upon future expectations.
Nothing will appear more logical and natural to this audience than the
idea that a common stock should be valued and priced primarily on the
basis of the company’s expected future performance. Yet this simple￾appearing concept carries with it a number of paradoxes and pitfalls. For
one thing, it obliterates a good part of the older, well-established
distinctions between investment and speculation. The dictionary says that
“speculate” comes from the Latin “specula,” a lookout. Thus it was the
speculator who looked out and saw future developments coming before
other people did. But today, if the investor is shrewd or well advised, he too
must have his lookout on the future, or rather he mounts into a common
lookout where he rubs elbows with the speculator.
Secondly, we find that, for the most part, companies with the best
investment characteristics—i.e., the best credit rating—are the ones which
are likely to attract the largest speculative interest in their common stocks,
since everyone assumes they are guaranteed a brilliant future. Thirdly, the
concept of future prospects, and particularly of continued growth in the
future, invites the application of formulas out of higher mathematics to
establish the present value of the favored issues. But the combination of
precise formulas with highly imprecise assumptions can be used to
establish, or rather to justify, practically any value one wishes, however
high, for a really outstanding issue. But, paradoxically, that very fact on
close examination will be seen to imply that no one value, or reasonably
narrow range of values, can be counted on to establish and maintain itself
for a given growth company; hence at times the market may conceivably
value the growth component at a strikingly low figure.
Returning to my distinction between the older and newer speculative
elements in common stock, we might characterize them by two outlandish
but convenient words, viz.: endogenous and exogenous. Let me illustrate
briefly the old-time speculative common stock, as distinguished from an
investment stock, by some data relating to American Can and Pennsylvania
Railroad in 1911–1913. (These appear in Benjamin Graham and David L.
Dodd, Security Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1940, pp. 2–3.)
In those three years the price range of “Pennsy” moved only between 53
and 65, or between 12.2 and 15 times its average earnings for the period. It
showed steady profits, was paying a reliable $3 dividend, and investors
were sure that it was backed by well over its par of $50 in tangible assets.
By contrast, the price of American Can ranged between 9 and 47; its
earnings between 7 cents and $8.86; the ratio of price to the three-year
average earnings moved between 1.9 times and 10 times; it paid no
dividend at all; and sophisticated investors were well aware that the $100
par value of the common represented nothing but undisclosed “water,” since
the preferred issue exceeded the tangible assets available for it. Thus
American Can common was a representative speculative issue, because
American Can Company was then a speculatively capitalized enterprise in a
fluctuating and uncertain industry. Actually, American Can had a far more
brilliant long-term future than Pennsylvania Railroad; but not only was this
fact not suspected by investors or speculators in those days, but even if it
had been it would probably have been put aside by the investors as basically
irrelevant to investment policies and programs in the years 1911–1913.
Now, to expose you to the development through time of the importance
of long-term prospects for investments. I should like to use as my example
our most spectacular giant industrial enterprise—none other than
International Business Machines, which last year entered the small group of
companies with $1 billion of sales. May I introduce one or two
autobiographical notes here, in order to inject a little of the personal touch
into what otherwise would be an excursion into cold figures? In 1912 I had
left college for a term to take charge of a research project for U.S. Express
Company. We set out to find the effect on revenues of a proposed
revolutionary new system of computing express rates. For this purpose we
used the so-called Hollerith machines, leased out by the then Computing￾Tabulating-Recording Company. They comprised card punches, card
sorters, and tabulators—tools almost unknown to businessmen, then, and
having their chief application in the Census Bureau. I entered Wall Street in
1914, and the next year the bonds and common stock of C.-T.-R. Company
were listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Well, I had a kind of
sentimental interest in that enterprise, and besides I considered myself a sort
of technological expert on their products, being one of the few financial
people who had seen and used them. So early in 1916 I went to the head of
my firm, known as Mr. A. N., and pointed out to him that C.-T.-R. stock
was selling in the middle 40s (for 105,000 shares); that it had earned $6.50
in 1915; that its book value—including, to be sure, some nonsegregated
intangibles—was $130; that it had started a $3 dividend; and that I thought
rather highly of the company’s products and prospects. Mr. A. N. looked at
me pityingly. “Ben,” said he, “do not mention that company to me again. I
would not touch it with a ten-foot pole. [His favorite expression.] Its 6 per
cent bonds are selling in the low 80s and they are no good. So how can the
stock be any good? Everybody knows there is nothing behind it but water.”
(Glossary: In those days that was the ultimate of condemnation. It meant
that the asset account of the balance sheet was fictitious. Many industrial
companies—notably U.S. Steel—despite their $100 par, represented
nothing but water, concealed in a written-up plant account. Since they had
“nothing” to back them but earning power and future prospects, no self￾respecting investor would give them a second thought.)
I returned to my statistician’s cubbyhole, a chastened young man. Mr. A.
N. was not only experienced and successful, but extremely shrewd as well.
So much was I impressed by his sweeping condemnation of Computing￾Tabulating-Recording that I never bought a share of it in my life, not even
after its name was changed to International Business Machines in 1926.
Now let us take a look at the same company with its new name in 1926,
a year of pretty high stock markets. At that time it first revealed the good￾will item in its balance sheet, in the rather large sum of $13.6 million. A. N.
had been right. Practically every dollar of the so-called equity behind the
common in 1915 had been nothing but water. However, since that time the
company had made an impressive record under the direction of T. L.
Watson, Sr. Its net had risen from $691,000 to $3.7 million—over fivefold
—a greater percentage gain than it was to make in any subsequent eleven￾year period. It had built up a nice tangible equity for the common, and had
split it 3.6 for one. It had established a $3 dividend rate for the new stock,
while earnings were $6.39 thereon. You might have expected the 1926 stock
market to have been pretty enthusiastic about a company with such a
growth history and so strong a trade position. Let us see. The price range for
that year was 31 low, 59 high. At the average of 45 it was selling at the
same 7-times multiplier of earnings and the same 6.7 per cent dividend
yield as it had done in 1915. At its low of 31 it was not far in excess of its
tangible book value, and in that respect was far more conservatively priced
than eleven years earlier.
These data illustrate, as well as any can, the persistence of the old-time
investment viewpoint until the culminating years of the bull market of the
1920s. What has happened since then can be summarized by using ten-year
intervals in the history of IBM. In 1936 net expanded to twice the 1926
figures, and the average multiplier rose from 7 to 17½. From 1936 to 1946
the gain was 2½ times, but the average multiplier in 1946 remained at 17½.
Then the pace accelerated. The 1956 net was nearly 4 times that of 1946,
and the average multiplier rose to 32½. Last year, with a further gain in net,
the multiplier rose again to an average of 42, if we do not count the
unconsolidated equity in the foreign subsidiary.
When we examine these recent price figures with care we see some
interesting analogies and contrasts with those of forty years earlier. The
one-time scandalous water, so prevalent in the balance sheets of industrial
companies, has all been squeezed out—first by disclosure and then by
writeoffs. But a different kind of water has been put back into the valuation
by the stock market—by investors and speculators themselves. When IBM
now sells at 7 times its book value, instead of 7 times earnings, the effect is
practically the same as if it had no book value at all. Or the small book￾value portion can be considered as a sort of minor preferred-stock
component of the price, the rest representing exactly the same sort of
commitment as the old-time speculator made when he bought Woolworth or
U.S. Steel common entirely for their earning power and future prospects.
It is worth remarking, in passing, that in the thirty years which saw IBM
transformed from a 7-times earnings to a 40-times earnings enterprise,
many of what I have called the endogenous speculative aspects of our large
industrial companies have tended to disappear, or at least to diminish
greatly. Their financial positions are firm, their capital structures
conservative: they are managed far more expertly, and even more honestly,
than before. Furthermore, the requirements of complete disclosure have
removed one of the important speculative elements of years ago—that
derived from ignorance and mystery. 